now US Secretary of State Anthony
blinkin says that Israel has accepted a
proposal to bridge differences that are
holding up a ceasefire and hostage
release in Gaza he made the announcement
after meetings with Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and
president Isaac Herzog in Israel blinkin
says it's now up to Hamas whose
terrorist attack on October 7th started
the current War to agree to the
plan it is US Secretary of State and
anony blinken's ninth visit to the
Middle East since the war in Gaza began
over 10 months
ago following meetings with Israel's
leaders he outlined the proposed next
steps towards ending the
war this includes a so-called bridging
proposal which blinkin says should
Bridge the gaps remaining between the
two
sides the the bridging proposal that um
prime minister Netanyahu has has
accepted and we look to Hamas to accept
reflects what is in the um ceasefire
agreement that President Biden put
before the world uh back uh back in May
that's incorporated into un Security
Council
resolution uh and that makes clear that
this process will proceed in phases um a
first uh initial ceasefire over the
course of six weeks in which hostages
are released prisoners uh are exchanged
and negotiations commence on um the
conditions necessary for an enduring
ceasefire but as blinkin heads off to
Egypt for the next round of talks
disagreements remain between Israel and
Hamas these include Israel's refusal to
withdraw all of its troops from Gaza a
red line for
Hamas Israel would also like to retain
some strategic control in Gaza including
along its Southern border with Egypt the
Rafa
Crossing and the Philadelphia
Corridor in Gaza smoke Rising above
canun marks the latest bombardment by
Israeli
forces the city in the south of the
strip Bears the scars of months of
fighting its residents have grown
skeptical of any attempts by the United
States to secure
peace Lincoln's visit to Israel will not
change anything every time we hear it
will but it turns out that there are no
negotiations it's all
[Music]
lies we suffer a lot in
Gaza and we feel that the Americans and
the International Community are ganging
up on us without
Mercy this visit to Israel is just for
the US to check in with Israel and
provide it with arms and Logistics so it
continues its extermination in war on
Gaza this won't change anything we are
very pessimistic about his
visit pessimism that grows day by day as
the war rolls
on well Gerald fire firestein is
director of the Middle East institute's
Arabian Peninsula Affairs program he
joins me now from Philadelphia in the us
thank you so much for joining us here on
DW blinkin says Israel has accepted the
bridging deal but so far there's been
little detail about specifics what do
you think the current proposal is likely
to
include it's a pleasure to be with you
this evening Hana uh and I think that
you know as uh as secretary blinkin said
uh the basic framework is the
three-phase uh initiative that President
Biden announced about three months ago
which includes the the immediate
ceasefire exchange of prisoners other
issues like humanitarian relief and is
then supposed to go on to more detailed
negotiations uh that uh that would
include establishing a format for
governance Security in Gaza and
ultimately hopefully uh the beginning of
a resumed Israeli Palestinian dialogue
that would lead to a fin final
resolution of the conflict and the
establishment hopefully of an
independent Palestinian state but all of
those things are in the distant
future and Hamas has accused Israel of
moving the goalpost of these talks
during previous talks but are we
actually any closer to a deal
today well it's a it's a very good
question and and again this isn't the
first time that secretary blinkin has
said that Israel has aced accepted
proposals only to find out afterwards
that uh that there was a very optimistic
uh perspective that he was sharing and
that uh and that we weren't actually uh
on the verge of of an acceptance so uh
we're going to have to wait and see what
comes out of the talks in Egypt and then
in in Doha afterwards uh to see whether
in fact uh the Israelis have said yes
and whether in fact Hamas is prepared to
say yes as well
and some observers have also criticized
the US for not really bringing enough
pressure to bear on Israel to bring
about a ceasefire is the US really doing
all that it
can well again I think that President
Biden has been trying to walk a very
fine line between uh between uh pressing
Israel through uh through initiatives
through drawing if you will uh but not
dropping a a hammer in the form of arms
uh arms secession or or other kinds of
of real uh pressure that would uh that
would certainly create a a stir in in
Israel uh but would also create a big
stir here in the United States and you
know keeping in mind that we are uh at
the at the beginning of the uh ultimate
phase of the presidential elections uh
the president is going to be very
mindful not only of what's happening in
Gaza in the Middle East but also of
course what the impact is going to be
domestically Gerald firin director of
the Middle East institute's Arabian
Peninsula Affairs program thank you so
much for joining us on
DW
pleasure Michael Singh is managing
director of the Washington Institute for
near East policy in Washington DC and a
former senior director for Middle East
affairs at the US National Security
Council uh Michael Anthony blinkin has
called his latest diplomatic push
probably the best and maybe the last
opportunity for a ceasefire deal is that
a fair
assessment well I think we are hearing
more optimistic takes now from us
officials whereas in previous weeks
there had been a lot of concern
expressed by us officials about
especially the attitude of the Israeli
government uh worried that perhaps prime
minister Netanyahu was introducing new
issues removing the goalposts I I take
some of this current optimism to suggest
that perhaps those gaps have been closed
it's important to remember though that
you know uh of course hamas's uh reply
matters as well and we've yet to hear a
positive or definitive response from
Hamas that suggests that they're ready
to accept a ceas far now Hamas has have
called it an illusion uh but at a news
conference he gave after the talks
blinkin expressed some additional
optimism uh let's have a quick listen to
what he said
there just last week the president put
forward a proposal with cutter uh and
with Egypt to try to bridge the gaps
that remain between the parties so that
we could get agreement to what the
president put out there a couple of
months
ago um in a very constructive meeting
with prime minister Netanyahu today uh
he confirmed to me that Israel accepts
the bridging proposal now Michael S put
this if you would in LAN
terms for us what is the bridging
proposal and how significant is this
agreement with Netanyahu
then well I think as I said you know
there have been these differences that
have emerged between the United States
and Israel over the last several weeks
uh over issues like you know for example
who will control and how will it be
controlled at the the Israel I'm sorry
at the Gaza Egypt border to prevent more
arms from coming into Hamas you know how
will people be allowed to move around
the Gaza Strip after a ceasefire
agreement is reached it does sound as
though these gaps have been narrowed or
closed and and what the US has put
forward together with cutter and Egypt
is a proposal meant to try to to sort of
make compromises on these types of
issues as well as the many others which
are under discussion and so I take again
secretary blinken's optimism to suggest
that he made progress in closing these
gaps between the US and Israel um but
but we still as I said don't really have
an indication as to whether Hamas will
accept it I I think that us officials
May hope that Iran Hezbollah and other
parties in the region U which are maybe
are looking for a reprieve from conflict
or looking for a pretext to uh halt
their hostilities with Israel that they
might put pressure on Hamas but again
it's ultimately Yahya sinir in Gaza the
head of Hamas who's the decider here and
he hasn't said yes Aus so in your view
what Remains the main sticking point on
the path to a
deal well you know the sticking point in
a in a sort of near-term sense is
waiting to hear from Hamas whether
they'll accept this deal which
apparently is acceptable to the US to
Israel uh to the Egyptian and Cuttery
mediators and so forth but I think quite
fundamentally one thing we need to
remember is that even though we talk
about this deal as involving essentially
a ceasefire on the one hand the release
of hostages and the Palestinian
prisoners on the other hand in fact
there is more at play here presid prime
minister Netanyahu has has promised
total victory over Hamas whereas Hamas
wants to live to fight another day and
and reconciling those two fundamental
objectives is quite hard so even if a
ceasefire agreement is reached you know
it's tough to imagine that this won't
simply be a Prelude to more fighting in
the in the months and the years to come
without more fundamental changes on the
ground there in Gaza now during uh this
trip Lincoln has also repeatedly warned
it's time to make sure that no one takes
quote any steps that could derail this
process who and what was he referring
to well I think the parties he has in
mind when he says that are Iran and
Hezbollah because both Iran and
Hezbollah have vowed retaliation against
Israel for Israeli strikes on their
territory um but they have so far held
off now in my view they've held off in
large part because they may not want to
fight a war with Israel they may worry
that they would lose or that they would
be severely
damaged in a in a war with Israel um but
they've promised essentially this
retaliation and so they may be looking
for a pretext to avoid it I suspect that
if there is a ceasefire agreement that
both Iran and Hezbollah may take the
opportunity to claim credit for it and
move on and I think that's what
secretary blinking blinkin is hoping
they'll do Michael Singler the
Washington Institute for nearas policy
in Washington DC thank you very much for
sharing your expertise with
us thank you for